# Elements of sets
The symbol $\in$ is used to express the relation ‘is an element of’. That is, if *a* is an entity and *A* is a set, then *a* $\in$ *A* is a statement that is true if and only if *a* is one of the elements of *A*. In that case, we also say that *a* is a [[member]] of the set *A*. The assertion that *a* is not an element of *A* is expressed by the notation $a \notin A$. Note that both $a \in A$ and $a \notin A$ are statements in the sense of propositional logic. That is, they are assertions which can be either true or false. The statement $a \notin A$ is equivalent to $\neg(a \in A)$.

It is possible for a set to be empty, that is, to contain no elements whatsoever. Since a set is completely determined by the elements that it contains, there is only one set that contains no elements. This set is called the [[empty set]], and it is denoted by the symbol $\emptyset$. Note that for any element *a*, the statement a $\in$ $\emptyset$ is false. The empty set, $\emptyset$, can also be denoted by an empty pair of braces, i.e., { }.

If *A* and *B* are sets, then, by definition, *A* is equal to *B* if and only if they contain exactly the same elements. In this case, we write $A = B$. Using the notation of predicate logic, we can say that $A = B$ if and only if $\forall x(x \in A \leftrightarrow x \in B)$.

Suppose now that *A* and *B* are sets such that every element of *A* is an element of *B*. In that case, we say that *A* is a [[subset]] of *B*, i.e. *A* is a [[subset]] of *B* if and only if $\forall x(x \in A \rightarrow x \in B)$. The fact that *A* is a subset of *B* is denoted by $A \subseteq B$. Note that $\emptyset$ is a subset of every set *B*: *x* $\in$ $\emptyset$ is false for any *x*, and so given any *B*, $(x \in \emptyset \rightarrow x \in B)$ is true for all *x*.

If $A = B$, then it is automatically true that $A \subseteq B$ and that $B \subseteq A$. The [[converse]] is also true: If $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq A$, then $A = B$. This follows from the fact that for any *x*, the statement $(x \in A \leftrightarrow x \in B)$ is logically equivalent to the statement $(x \in A \rightarrow x \in B) \wedge (x \in B \rightarrow x \in A)$. This fact is important enough to state as a theorem.

### Theorem 4.1
Let A and B be sets. Then A = B if and only if both A ⊆ B and B ⊆ A.

This theorem expresses the following advice: If you want to check that two sets, *A* and *B*, are equal, you can do so in two steps. First check that every element of *A* is also an element of *B*, and then check that every element of *B* is also an element of *A*.

If $A \subseteq B$ but $A \neq B$, we say that *A* is a [[proper subset]] of *B*. We use the notation $A \subset B$ to mean that *A* is a proper subset of *B*. That is, $A \subset B$ if and only if $A \subseteq B \wedge A \neq B$. Additionally, you may come across $A \nsubseteq B$ which means that *A* is not a subset of *B*. 