# Set-builder notation
A set can contain an infinite number of elements. In such a case, it is not possible to list all the elements in the set: we cannot give an [[extensional definition]] of the set. Sometimes the ellipsis ‘…’ is used to indicate a list that continues on infinitely. For example, $\mathbb{N}$, the set of natural numbers, can be specified as
$$
\mathbb{N} = \{0,1,2,3,...\}
$$
However, this is an informal notation, which is not really well-defined, and it should only be used in cases where it is clear what it means. It’s not very useful to say that “the set of prime numbers is $\{2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, . . . \}$”, and it is completely meaningless to talk about “the set $\{17, 42, 105, . . . \}$”. Clearly, we need another way to specify sets besides listing their elements. The need is fulfilled by predicates.

If *P(x)* is a predicate, then we can form the set that contains all entities *a* such that *a* is in the domain of discourse for *P* and *P(a)* is true. The notation *{x | P(x)}* is used to denote this set. This is the [[intensional definition]] of the set. The name of the variable, *x*, is arbitrary, so the same set could equally well be denoted as *{z | P(z)}* or *{r | P(r)}*. The notation *{x | P(x)}* can be read “the set of *x* such that *P(x)*”. We call this the [[set-builder notation]], as you can think of the predicate as a building material for the elements of the
set. For example, if *E(x)* is the predicate ‘*x* is an even number’, and if the domain of discourse for *E* is the set $\mathbb{N}$, then the notation *{x | E(x)}* specifies the set of even natural numbers. That is,
$$
\{x|E(x)\} = \{0,2,4,6,8,...\}
$$
Often, it is useful to specify the domain of discourse explicitly in the notation that defines a set. In the above example, to make it clear that *x* must be a natural number, we could write the set as $\{x \in N| E(x)\}$. This notation can be read as “the set of all *x* in $\mathbb{N}$ such that *E(x)*”. More generally, if *X* is a set and *P* is a predicate whose domain of discourse includes all the elements of *X*, then the notation
$$
\{x \in X|P(x)\}
$$
is the set that consists of all entities *a* that are members of the set *X* and for which *P(a)* is true. In this notation, we don’t have to assume that the domain of discourse for *P* is a set, since we are effectively limiting the domain of discourse to the set *X*. The set denoted by $\{x \in X | P(x)\}$ could also be written as $\{x | x \in X \wedge P(x)\}$.