Next, while we are on the topic of induction, let’s generalise the idea of induction to also apply it to sets. This more general form of induction is often called structural induction. Structural induction is used to prove that some proposition P(x) holds for all x of some sort of recursively defined structure, such as formulae, lists, or trees—or recursively-defined sets. In a proof by structural induction we show that the proposition holds for all the ‘minimal’ structures, and that if it holds for the immediate substructures of
a certain structure S, then it must hold for S also. Structural induction is useful for proving properties about algorithms; sometimes it is used together with invariants for this purpose.

To get an idea of what a ‘recursively defined set’ might look like, consider the following definition of the set of natural numbers N.

**Basis:** 0 $\in \mathbb{N}$.
**Succesion:** $x \in N \rightarrow x + 1 \in N$.
**Exclusivity:** No other elements other than those outlined by the rules above are in $\mathbb{N}$.

This definition is similar to one we have seen before, first stating that 0 ∈ N and then saying that we can add 1 to an element in N to get another element of N. The final clause is needed to ensure that other items are not part of N. Without it, you and I, as well as π, ‘New York City’, and ‘King Willem-Alexander’ might have been in the set. After all there was no reason for those elements not to be in there.

Now compare that recursive definition, with the method for mathematical induction we have seen before:
**Base case:** Prove that P(0) holds
**Inductive case:** Prove that $\forall k \in N(P(k) \rightarrow P(k + 1))$ holds.
**Conclusion::** $\forall n \in N(P(n))$ holds.

As we can see mathematical induction and this recursive definition show large similarities. The base case of the induction proves the property for the basis of our recursive definition and the inductive step proves the property for the succession rule. In fact, this similarity is no coincidence and we can generalise this method to get to structural induction.

Consider for instance the set PROP, which represents all valid formulae in propositional logic:
**Atoms:** $p_i \in PROP$ for all $i \in N$.
**Negation:** $x \in PROP \rightarrow \neg x \in PROP$.
**Binary connective:** $x, y \in PROP \rightarrow (x ∗ y) \in PROP, s.t. ∗ \in {\wedge, \vee,\rightarrow,\leftrightarrow}$.
**Exclusivity:** Nothing else is in PROP.

Using this definition of the set PROP we can use structural induction to prove certain claims about PROP. For instance we can prove that every formula in PROP has equally many left parentheses ‘(’ and right parentheses ‘)’.

**Proof.**
Let l(ϕ) denote the number of left parentheses in a formula ϕ. Similarly let r(ϕ) denote the number of right parentheses. Let P(ϕ) be the statement that l(ϕ) = r(ϕ). We need to prove that ∀ϕ ∈ PROP(P(ϕ)).

**Base case:**
Consider the Atoms rule of the definition of PROP: l(pi) = 0 = r(pi). Therefore P(pi) holds.

**Inductive case:**
We want to show that if the statement is true for x, y ∈ PROP (where x and y are arbitrary formula), then it is true for ¬x and (x ∗ y) for all ∗ ∈ {∨, ∧,→,↔}. That is, we must prove the implication (P(x) ∧ P(y)) → (P(¬x) ∧ P((x ∗ y))). So we assume P(x) ∧ P(y), that is, we assume that for both formula x and y: l(x) = r(x) and l(y) = r(y). We want to prove P(¬x), that is, that for ¬x l(¬x) = r(¬x)
$$
\begin{align}
l(\neg x) = l(x) \\
= r(x) \\
= r(\neg x)
\end{align}
$$
Secondly we prove that P((x ∗ y)) holds for all ∗ ∈ {∨, ∧,→,↔}:
$$
\begin{align}
l((x*y)) = 1 + l(x) + l(y) \\
= 1 + r(x) + r(y) \\
= r((x * y))
\end{align}
$$
Altogether, we have shown that P(pi) holds and that, for all x, y ∈ PROP and ∗ ∈ {∨, ∧,→,↔}, (P(x) ∧ P(y)) → (P(¬x) ∧ P((x ∗ y)) is true. Therefore, by the principle of structural induction, P(ϕ) is true for all ϕ ∈ PROP, so for all propositional formula the number of left parentheses equals the number of right parentheses. This completes the proof by structural induction.
**QED.**

Such structural induction proofs can be applied on any recursively defined set of numbers, formulae or even strings (pieces of text) or lists or trees, making this a powerful generalised proof method.