# Disjunctive Normal Form
Compound propositions, then, correspond naturally with combinatorial logic circuits. But we have still not quite settled the question of just how powerful these circuits and propositions are. We’ve looked at a number of logical operators and noted that they can all be expressed in terms of $\wedge$, $\vee$, and $\neg$. But might there be other operators that cannot be so expressed?  Any logical operator computes a value for each possible combination of logical values of its inputs. We could always make a truth table showing the output for each possible combination of inputs. As it turns out, given any such truth table, it is possible to find a proposition, containing only the $\wedge$, $\vee$, and $\neg$ operators, whose value for each combination of inputs is given precisely by that table.

To see why this is true, it is useful to introduce a particular type of compound proposition. Define a [[simple term]] to be either a propositional variable or the negation of a propositional variable. A conjunction of simple terms would then consist of one or more simple terms put together with $\wedge$
operators. Some examples of conjunctions of simple terms would be p $\wedge$ q, p, $\neg$q, and p $\wedge$ $\neg$r $\wedge$ $\neg$w $\wedge$ s $\wedge$ t. Finally, we can take one or more such conjunctions and join them into a ‘disjunction of conjunctions of simple terms’. This is the type of compound proposition we need. We can avoid some redundancy by assuming that no propositional variable occurs more than once in a single conjunction (since p $\wedge$ p can be replaced by p, and if p and $\neg$p both occur in a conjunction, then the value of the conjuction is false, and it can be eliminated.) We can also assume that the same conjunction does not occur twice in the disjunction.

### Definition 2.6
A compound proposition is said to be in [[Definition 2.6|disjunctive normal form]], or **DNF**, if it is a disjunction of conjunctions of simple terms, and if, furthermore, each propositional variable occurs at most once in each conjunction and each conjunction occurs at most once in the disjunction.

Using p, q, r, s, A, and B as propositional variables, here are a few examples
of propositions that are in disjunctive normal form:

<center>(p ∧ q ∧ r) ∨ (p ∧ ¬q ∧ r ∧ s) ∨ (¬p ∧ ¬q)</center>
<center>(p ∧ ¬q)</center>
<center>(A ∧ ¬B) ∨ (¬A ∧ B</center>
<center>p ∨ (¬p ∧ q) ∨ (¬p ∧ ¬q ∧ r) ∨ (¬p ∧ ¬q ∧ ¬r ∧ w)</center>

Propositions in DNF are just what we need to deal with input/output tables of the type that we have been discussing. Any such table can be computed by a proposition in disjunctive normal form. It follows that it is possible to build a circuit to compute that table using only AND, OR, and NOT gates.

### Theorem 2.3
Consider a table that lists a logical output value for every combination of values of several propositional variables. Assume that at least one of the output values is true. Then there is a proposition containing those variables such that the value of the proposition for each possible combination of the values of thevariables is precisely the value specified in the table. It is possible to choose the proposition to be in disjunctive normal form.

*Proof*. Consider any row in the table for which the output value is **T**. Form a conjunction of simple terms as follows: For each variable, p, whose value is **T** in that row, include p itself in the conjunction; for each variable, q, whose value is **F** in the row, include $\neg$q in the conjunction. The value of this conjunction is **T** for the combination of variable values given in that row of the table, since each of the terms in the conjuction is true for that combination of variables. Furthermore, for any other possible combination of variable values, the value of the conjunction will be **F**, since at least one of the simple terms in the conjunction will be false.

Take the disjunction of all such conjunctions constructed in this way, for each row in the table where the output value is true. This disjunction has the value **T** if and only if one of the conjunctions that make it up has the value **T**, and that is precisely when the output value specified by the table is **T**. So, this disjunction of conjunctions satisfies the requirements of the
theorem.

As an example, consider the table in the figure below. This table specifies a desired output value for each possible combination of values for the propositional variables p, q, and r. Look at the second row of the table, where the output value is true. According to the proof of the theorem, this row corresponds to the conjunction ($\neg$p $\wedge$ $\neg$q $\wedge$ r). This conjunction is true when p is false, q is false, and r is true; in all other cases it is false, since in any other case at least one of the terms $\neg$p, $\neg$q, or r is false. The other two rows where the output is true give two more conjunctions. The three conjunctions are combined to produce the DNF proposition ($\neg$p $\wedge$ $\neg$q $\wedge$ r) $\vee$ ($\neg$p $\wedge$ q $\wedge$ r) $\vee$ (p $\wedge$ q $\wedge$ r). This proposition computes all the output values specified in the table. Using this proposition as a blueprint, we get a logic circuit whose outputs match those given in the table.

| p   | q   | r   | output |               |
| --- | --- | --- | ------ | ------------- |
| F   | F   | F   | F      |               |
| F   | F   | T   | T      | ($\neg$p $\wedge$ $\neg$q $\wedge$ r) |
| F   | T   | F   | F      |               |
| F   | T   | T   | T      | ($\neg$p $\wedge$ q $\wedge$ r)  |
| T   | F   | F   | F      |               |
| T   | F   | T   | F      |               |
| T   | T   | F   | F      |               |
| T   | T   | T   | T      | p $\wedge$ q $\wedge$ r     | 

## Conjunctive normal form
A proposition in the [[conjunctive Normal Form]] is a [[conjunction]] of [[disjunction]] of simple terms (with the proviso, as in the definition of DNF that a single item counts as a conjunction or disjunction).