As you are taking **Reasoning & Logic**, you have many different tasks that you need to complete. Reading sections from the book, doing book exercises, homework assignments, and of course exams. This can be quite overwhelming, both in figuring out where to start, as well as to figure out what order to complete tasks in. Fortunately you can use a graph to help you structure your tasks!

If you are given a number of tasks you need to do, with precedence constraints between them (for example you need to read the book and watch a video, before doing the homework) as a set of ordered pairs. You can model this problem as a graph, turning tasks into vertices and these precedence constraints into edges. The result may look very similar to those you find on *ad-cs.ewi.tudelft.nl*! Assuming it is feasible to do the tasks, your graph will be what we call a [[Directed Acyclic Graph]] (or [[DAG]]). After all, if there is some cycle in your graph, then a task can never be completed! (Do you see why?)

Now to find an order in which the tasks can be completed, we look for what we call a [[topological ordering]]. In such an ordering we number the vertices $v_1$ through $v_{|V|}$ in such a way that for all edges $(v_x, v_y) \in E$ it holds that $x \lt y$. For example, for the graph $G_2$ in the previous section, *a*, *s*, *b*, *t* is a possible topological ordering. A method to find such a topological ordering is as follows:

1. Pick a vertex without incoming edges.
2. Add it to the topological ordering, and remove it and its outgoing edges from the graph.
3. While there are still vertices left, go back to step 1.

In the exercises, you will be asked to write a proof by contradiction to prove that there is always a vertex without incoming edges in a DAG. You will further analyse and also implement this algorithm in the **Algorithms & Data Structures** course.