# More rules of Boolean Algebra
It is certainly not true that all possible rules of Boolean algebra are given in Figure 2.2. For one thing, there are many rules that are easy consequences of the rules that are listed there. For example, although the table asserts only that F $\vee$ p $\equiv$ p, it is also true that p $\vee$ F $\equiv$ p. This can be checked directly or by a simple calculation:

p $\vee$ **F** $\equiv$ **F** $\vee$ p [[commutative law|Commutative Law]]
		  $\equiv$  p      [[identity law|Identity Law as given in the table]]

Additional rules can be obtained by applying the [[Commutative law|Commutative Law]] to other rules in the table, and we will use such rules freely in the future.

Another sort of easy extension can be applied to the [[Associative law|Associative Law]], (p $\vee$ q) $\vee$ r $\equiv$ p $\vee$ (q $\vee$ r). The law is stated for the $\vee$ operator applied to three terms, but it generalizes to four or more terms. For example:

((p $\vee$ q) $\vee$ r) $\vee$ s
			$\equiv$ (p $\vee$ q) $\vee$ (r $\vee$ s) by the Associative Law for three terms
			$\equiv$ p $\vee$ (q $\vee$ (r $\vee$ s)) by the Associative Law for three terms

We will, of course, often write this expression as p $\vee$ q $\vee$ r $\vee$ s, with no parentheses at all, knowing that wherever we put the parentheses the value is the same.

So far in this section, we have been working with the laws of Boolean algebra without saying much about what they mean or why they are reasonable. Of course, you can apply the laws in calculations without understanding them. But if you want to figure out *which* calculations to do, you need some understanding. Most of the laws are clear enough with a little thought. For example, if we already know that q is false, then p $\vee$ q will be true when p is true and false when p is false. That is, p $\vee$ **F** has the same logical value as p. But that’s just what the [[identity law|Identity Law]] for $\vee$ says. A few of the laws need more discussion.

[[excluded middle law|The Law of the Excluded Middle]], p $\vee$ $\neg$p $\equiv$ **T**, says that given any proposition p, at least one of p or $\neg$p must be true. Since $\neg$p is true exactly when p is false, this is the same as saying that p must be either true or false. There is no middle ground. The Law of Contradiction, p $\wedge$ $\neg$p $\equiv$ **F**, says that it is not possible for *both* p and $\neg$p to be true. Both of these rules are obvious.

[[distributive law|The Distributive Laws]] cannot be called obvious, but a few examples can show that they are reasonable. Consider the statement, “This card is the ace of spades or clubs.” Clearly, this is equivalent to “This card is the ace of spaces or this card is the ace of clubs.” But this is just an example of the first distributive law! For now, let *a* represent the proposition “This card is an ace”, let *s* represent “This card is a spade” and let *c* represent “This card is a club”. Then “This card is the ace of spades or clubs” can be translated into logic as a $\wedge$ (s $\vee$ c), while “This card is the ace of spades or this card is the ace of clubs” becomes (a $\wedge$ s) $\vee$ (a $\wedge$ c). And the distributive law assures us that a $\wedge$ (s $\vee$ c) $\equiv$ (a $\wedge$ s) $\vee$ (a $\wedge$ c). The second distributive law tells us, for example, that “This card is either a joker or is the ten of diamonds” is logically equivalent to “This card is either a joker or a ten, and it is either a joker or a diamond”. That is, j $\vee$ (t $\wedge$ d) $\equiv$ (j $\vee$ t) $\wedge$ (j $\vee$ d). The distributive laws are powerful tools and you should keep them in mind whenever you are faced with a mixture of $\wedge$ and $\vee$ operators.

[[De Morgan's law|De Morgan's laws]] must also be less than obvious, since people often get them wrong. More importantly perhaps they do also make sense. When considering $\neg$(p $\wedge$ q), you should ask yourself, how can ‘p and q’ fail to be true. It will fail to be true if either p is false or if q is false (or both). That is, $\neg$(p $\wedge$ q) is equivalent to ($\neg$p) $\vee$ ($\neg$q). Consider the sentence “A raven is large and black.” If a bird is not large and black, then it is not a raven. But what exactly does it mean to be ‘not (large and black)’? How can you tell whether the assertion ‘not (large and black)’ is true of something? This will be true if it is either not large or not black. (It doesn’t have to be both, it could be large and white, it could be small and black.) Similarly, for ‘p or q’ to fail to be true, both p and q must be false. That is, $\neg$(p $\vee$ q) is equivalent to ($\neg$p) $\wedge$ ($\neg$q). This is DeMorgan’s second law. 

Recalling that p $\rightarrow$ q is equivalent to ($\neg$p) $\vee$ q, we can apply DeMorgan’s law to obtain a formula for the negation an implication:

$\neg$(p $\rightarrow$ q) $\equiv$ $\neg$(($\neg$p) $\vee$ q)
			   $\equiv$ ($\neg$($\neg$p)) $\wedge$ ($\neg$q)
			   $\equiv$ p $\wedge$ $\neg$q

That is, p $\rightarrow$ q is false exactly when both p is true and q is false. For example, the negation of “If you have an ace, you win” is “You have an ace, and you don’t win”. Think of it this way: if you had an ace and you didn’t win, then the statement “If you have an ace, you win” was not true.
