# Logical operators
What we do with propositions is combine them with [[logical operators]], also reffered to as [[logical connectives]]. A logical operator can be applied to one or more propositions to produce a new propostion. In English, logical operators are represented by words such as 'and', 'or', and 'not'. For example, the propostion "I wanted to leave and I left" is formed from two simpeler propositions joined by the word 'and'. Adding the word 'not' to the proposition "I left" gives "I did not leave" (after grammatical adjustments).

The English language makes mathematical logic confusion. For example, when you read the sentence "I wanted to leave and I left", you probably see a connotation of causality: I left *because* I wanted to leave. This, however, does not follow from the logical combination of truth values of the two propositions. Another example, consider the propistion "I wanted to leave, but I did not". Here, the word 'but' has the same *logical* meaning as the word 'and', but the connotation is very different. Hence, in mathematical logic, *symbols* are used to represent logical operators:
- 'and': $\wedge$
- 'or': $\vee$
- 'not': $\neg$

### Definition 2.1.
Let *p* and *q* be propositions. Then *p $\vee$ q*, *p $\wedge$ q*, and $\neg$p are propositions, whose truth values are given by the rules:
- p $\wedge$ q is true when both p is true and q is true, and in no other case
- p $\vee$ q is true when either p is true, or q is true, or both p and q are true, and in no other case
- $\neg$p is true when p is false, and in no other case

The operators $\wedge$, $\vee$ and $\neg$ are referred to as [[conjunction]], [[disjunction]] and [[negation]], respectively. (Note that p $\wedge$ q is read as ‘p and q’, p $\vee$ q is read as ‘p or q’, and $\neg$p is read as ‘not p’.)