# Logical equivalence
To calculate in predicate logic, we need a notion of logical equivalence. Clearly, there are pairs of propositions in predicate logic that mean the same thing. Consider the propositions $\neg$($\forall$x*H(x)*) and $\exists$x($\neg$*H(x)*), where *H(x)* represents ‘x is happy’. The first of these propositions means “Not everyone is happy”, and the second means “Someone is not happy”. These statements have the same truth value: if not everyone is happy, then someone is unhappy and vice versa. But logical equivalence is much stronger than just having the same truth value. In propositional logic, logical equivalence is defined in terms of propositional variables: two compound propositions are logically equivalent if they have the same truth values for all possible truth values of the propositional variables they contain. In predicate logic, two formulas are logically equivalent if they have the same truth value for all possible predicates.

Consider $\neg$($\forall$x*P(x)*) and $\exists$x($\neg$*P(x)*). These formulas make sense for any predicate *P*, and for any predicate *P* they have the same truth value. Unfortunately, we can’t, as we did in propositional logic, just check this fact with a truth table: there are no subpropositions, connected by $\wedge$, $\vee$, etc, out of which to build a table. So, let’s reason it out: To say $\neg$($\forall$x*P(x)*) is true is just to say that it is not the case that *P(x)* is true for all possible entities *x*. So, there must be some entity a for which *P(a)* is false. Since *P(a)* is false, $\neg$*P(a)* is true. But saying that there is an a for which $\neg$*P(a)* is true is just saying that $\exists$x($\neg$*P(x)*) is true. So, the truth of $\neg$($\forall$x*P(x)*) implies the truth of $\exists$x($\neg$*P(x)*). On the other hand, if $\neg$($\forall$x*P(x)*) is false, then $\forall$x*P(x)* is true. Since *P(x)* is true for every *x*, $\neg$*P(x)* is false for every *x*; that is, there is no entity a for which the statement $\neg$*P(a)* is true. But this just means that the statement $\exists$x($\neg$*P(x)*) is false. In any case, then, the truth values of $\neg$($\forall$x*P(x)*) and $\exists$x($\neg$*P(x)*) are the same. Since this is true for any predicate *P*, we will say that these two formulas are logically equivalent and write $\neg$($\forall$x*P(x)*) $\equiv$ $\exists$x($\neg$*P(x)*).

A similar argument would show that $\neg$($\exists$x*P(x)*) $\equiv$ $\forall$x($\neg$*P(x)*). These two equivalences, which explicate the relation between negation and quantification, are known as [[De Morgan's law for predicate logic|DeMorgan’s Laws for predicate logic]]. These laws can be used to help simplify expressions. For example,
			$\neg$ $\forall$y(*R(y)* $\vee$ *Q(y)*) $\equiv$ $\exists$y($\neg$(*R(y)* $\vee$ *Q(y)*))
										$\equiv$ $\exists$y(($\neg$*R(y)*) $\wedge$ ($\neg$*Q(y)*)

It might not be clear exactly why this qualifies as a ‘simplification’, but it’s generally considered simpler to have the negation operator applied to basic propositions such as *R(y)*, rather than to quantified expressions such as $\forall$y(*R(y)* $\vee$ *Q(y)*). For a more complicated example:
			$\neg$ $\exists$x(P(x) $\wedge$ ($\forall$y(Q(y) → Q(x))))
							$\equiv$ $\forall$x($\neg$(P(x) $\wedge$ ($\forall$y(Q(y) → Q(x)))) 
							$\equiv$ $\forall$x(($\neg$P(x)) $\vee$ ($\neg$$\forall$y(Q(y) → Q(x))))
							$\equiv$ $\forall$x(($\neg$P(x)) $\vee$ ($\exists$y($\neg$(Q(y) → Q(x)))))
							$\equiv$ $\forall$x(($\neg$P(x)) $\vee$ ($\exists$y($\neg$($\neg$Q(y) $\vee$ Q(x)))))
							$\equiv$ $\forall$x(($\neg$P(x)) $\vee$ ($\exists$y($\neg$$\neg$Q(y) $\wedge$ $\neg$Q(x))))
							$\equiv$ $\forall$x(($\neg$P(x)) $\vee$ ($\exists$y(Q(y) $\wedge$ $\neg$Q(x))))

[[De Morgan's law for predicate logic|DeMorgan’s Laws]] are listed in the table below along with two other laws of predicate logic. The other laws allow you to interchange the order of the variables when two quantifiers of the same type (both $\exists$ or $\forall$) occur together.

| Laws                       |     | 
| ------------------------- | --- |
| ¬(∀xP(x)) ≡ ∃x(¬P(x))     |     |
| ¬(∃xP(x)) ≡ ∀x(¬P(x))     |     |
| ∀x∀yQ(x, y) ≡ ∀y∀xQ(x, y) |     |
| ∃x∃yQ(x, y) ≡ ∃y∃xQ(x, y) |     |

To define logical equivalence in predicate logic more formally, we need to talk about formulas that contain predicate variables, that is, variables that act as place-holders for arbitrary predicates in the same way that propositional variables are place-holders for propositions and entity variables are place-holders for entities. With this in mind, we can define logical equivalence and the closely related concept of tautology for predicate logic. We’ll see that these are crucial pieces of writing proofs.

### Definition 2.9
Let *P* be a formula of predicate logic which contains one or more predicate variables. *P* is said to be a [[tautology]] if it is true whenever all the predicate variables that it contains are replaced by actual predicates. Two formulas *P* and *Q* are said to be [[logically equivalent]] if *P* $\leftrightarrow$ *Q* is a tautology, that is if *P* and *Q* always have the same truth value when the predicate variables they contain are replaced by actual predicates. The notation *P* $\equiv$ *Q* asserts that *P* is logically equivalent to *Q*.