In [[Section 4.5]], we saw that ‘mother of’ is a functional relationship because, for the purpose of the example, every person has one and only one (biological) mother, but that ‘child of’ is not a functional relationship, because a person can have no children or more than one child. However, the relationship
expressed by ‘child of’ is certainly one that we have a right to be interested in and one that we should be able to deal with mathematically. We already saw a (mathematical) notion of ‘child’ when we looked at trees.

There are many examples of relationships that are not functional relationships. The relationship that holds between two natural numbers n and m when $n \leq m$ is an example in mathematics. The relationship between a person and a book that that person has on loan from the library is another. Some relationships involve more than two entities, such as the relationship that associates a name, an address and a phone number in an address book, or the relationship that holds among three real numbers *x*, *y*, and *z* if $x^2 + y^2 + z^2 = 1$. Each of these relationships can be represented mathematically by what is called a ‘relation’.

A [[relation]] on two sets, *A* and *B*, is defined to be a subset of *A x B*. Since a function from *A* to *B* is defined, formally, as a subset of *A x B* that satisfies certain properties, a function is a relation. However, relations are more general than functions, since any subset of *A* × *B* is a relation. We also define a relation among three or more sets to be a subset of the cross product of those sets. In particular, a relation on *A*, *B*, and *C* is a subset of *A* × *B* × *C*.

If *A* is a set and $\mathcal{R}$ is a relation on the sets *A* and *A* (that is, on two copies of *A*), then $\mathcal{R}$ is said to be a [[binary relation]] on *A*. That is, a binary relation on the set *A* is a subset of *A* × *A*. The relation consisting of all ordered pairs (*c*, *p*) of people such that *c* is a child of *p* is a binary relation on the set of people. The set $\{(n,m) \in N×N| n \leq m\}$ is a binary relation on *N*. Similarly, we define a ternary relation on a set *A* to be a subset of *A* × *A* × *A*. The set $\{(x, y, z) \in R × R × R | x^2 + y^2 + z^2 = 1\}$ is a ternary relation on $\mathbb{R}$. For complete generality, we can define an n-[[ary relation]] on *A*, for any positive integer *n*, to be a subset of *A* × *A* × · · · × *A*, where *A* occurs *n* times in the cross product.

For the rest of this section, we will be working exclusively with binary relations. Suppose that $\mathcal{R} \subseteq A × A$. That is, suppose that $\mathcal{R}$ is a binary relation on a set *A*. If $(a, b) \in R$, then we say that *a* is related to *b* by $\mathcal{R}$.
Instead of writing ‘$(a, b) \in R$’, we will often write ‘$a\ \mathcal{R}\ b$’. This notation is used in analogy to the notation $n \leq m$ to express the relation that *n* is less than or equal to *m*. Remember that $a\ \mathcal{R}\ b$ is just an alternative way of writing $(a, b) \in \mathcal{R}$. In fact, we could consider the relation $\leq$ to be a set of ordered pairs and write $(n,m) \in\ \leq$ in place of the notation n $\leq$ m.

## Index
- [[1. Properties of relations]]
- [[2. Equivalence relations]]